From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
From the moment President Trump barreled
into American politics, one of his
central messages that resonated most
with voters was his promise to keep the
country out of endless wars.
But now, as the war in Iran enters its
fourth week, leading figures on the
right are questioning whether Trump may
have gotten the US into exactly the sort
of complex and costly conflict he railed
against for so long.
Today, we talked to my colleague Robert
Draper about Trump's political evolution
on the question of war and the identity
crisis it's caused for the Republican
Party.
It's Monday, March 23rd.
Okay, Robert, you cover the right and
you functioned for us here at The Daily
as our guide, really, to all the
complexities of Trump and his party. And
right now seems to be a moment of
reckoning within that exact group over
the war in Iran. Specifically, the
justification for it and whether Trump
is explicitly violating a pact that he
made with his base of not starting
another war.
So, what is the level of tension that
you're seeing right now inside the MAGA
movement?
>> It's really a mess. You have people who
are still steadfast in their support for
what the administration is doing. There
are an awful lot of people, however, and
I'm talking not only about the
right-wing influencer ecosystem, but
also all the way down to voters who are
saying, is this what we voted for? We
thought no wars. We thought America
first. What are we doing over there?
What's this about $200 billion that
Trump now wants from Congress to
appropriate? Where was $200 billion when
I wanted to buy a home?
>> Mhm.
>> It has really, really become a
problematic matter for the Trump
administration.
>> What you're describing sounds like real
anger, right?
>> Yes, anger and disbelief. And inability
to square what is happening in Iran with
what Trump said on the campaign trail
and what Americans face as domestic
challenges.
>> Okay, let's talk about that. Let's go
there. What's the origin of that
disconnect, that disbelief?
>> So, we should go back to what I believe
was the fourth Republican presidential
primary debate in November of 2015.
>> Look at Iraq. Look at the mess we have
after spending $2 trillion,
thousands of lives, wounded warriors all
over the place who I love. Okay, all
over. We have nothing.
>> And there, on that stage, Trump
explicitly said that the Iraq war was no
one's idea of a success, but instead was
a tragic waste of American blood and
treasure.
>> And we have to get smart. We can't
continue to be the policeman of the
world. We owe $19 trillion.
We have a country that's going to hell.
>> And differentiated himself from other
candidates who had basically repeated
Republican orthodoxy about the Iraq war.
>> Donald Donald is wrong on this. He is
absolutely wrong on this. We're not
going to be the world's policeman, but
we sure as heck better be the world's
leader.
>> Can you just talk for a moment, Robert,
about how remarkable it was to hear
Trump say this? I mean, this was a break
from the orthodoxy of the Republican
Party for decades, right?
>> Yes.
It was understood that thou not speak
ill of a Republican president, George W.
Bush. And so for an office seeker, a
Republican office seeker, to stand up
and say that this war was just an
unambiguous screw-up, and you're never
going to see me do this kind of thing,
was really singular and I think
memorable to voters throughout the
campaign.
>> Yeah, that was something Democrats were
of course willing to say at that point,
but not Republicans.
>> No, that's right. So for Trump to do
that, really I think, you know, opened
Republican voters up to the notion that,
you know, we don't have to
embrace a militaristic viewpoint the way
hawks on our side of the aisle are
constantly urging us to, particularly
when we have seen what it's done to a
whole generation of Americans.
>> Yeah, exactly. It was kind of the first
and biggest example of Trump's saying
the thing that everyone thought but was
too afraid to say, and it really
obviously tapped into something.
>> Yeah, I mean it tapped into the notion
that
America's leaders were not to be trusted
and he was drawing a clear distinction
between what he was saying about our
troops and what he was saying about our
leadership. He was saying, "I love the
troops.
>> Mhm.
>> It's terrible what's happened to
veterans. They've been so mistreated.
And they've been mistreated by these
really, really stupid leaders who, you
know, can barely organize a one-car
funeral, much less prosecute a war
overseas."
>> And when you look at the centrality of
that message, both its resonance and how
much he referred to it in that 2016
campaign, I think it seemed to a lot of
people that this was the foundational
principle of America First. Along with
tariffs and immigration, this
non-interventionism
was core to what Trump stood for, to
what he was going to do.
>> That's right, because it seemed like a
very literal interpretation of America
first, which is we look inward. We take
care of people at home and in the
meantime, consider the outside world
only when it suits us, but unless and
until that happens, we take care of our
folks at home.
>> And we should point out, as you've said,
Trump has been very consistent with this
messaging throughout his political
career. It wasn't just in his first
campaign, right? I mean, this was
something he said in 2024. He was not
going to start any wars, he was going to
stop them.
>> Yes, I mean, he realized, Natalie, that
this was a winning message, that people
really responded to it.
>> We're tired of fighting. I'm the only
president in the last 84 years that
didn't start a war. Remember crooked
Hillary?
>> And so, he realized as well that he
could target his political opponent as
the person who will prosecute endless
wars. He said that about Hillary
Clinton. He later said it about Kamala
Harris. He said that she would get us
into a war with Iran.
>> She would get us into a World War III
guaranteed because she is too grossly
incompetent to do the job. She's not
going to be able to
>> And Trump, by the end of the 2024
campaign, was saying, "I'm the peace
president."
>> I said, "No, no, no. My rhetoric is
going to keep us out of wars."
>> There will be no endless wars under my
administration. I didn't take us to war
in my first term, I won't take us to war
in my second term. You can count on it.
But the notion that Trump was the peace
president, that we inferred that from
the things that he had said about the
Iraq war,
I think proved to be really misguided. I
think that it was something that we
fundamentally misunderstood about Trump
and what you would call his ideology.
>> Okay, explain that. What do you mean?
>> Sure. I mean, I think that we tend to
fall into the trap of assuming
that when Trump is espousing something,
that it is an ideology. When the belief,
in fact, that he is espousing is
self-belief. In other words, that he's
not saying, "Here is a core principle of
what we believe in." Instead, he's
saying,
"Other people are doing it stupid. I'm
going to do it smart." And in fact, he
was actually saying that in real time
during that presidential debate that I
referenced earlier.
>> Back in 2015, you mean?
>> Yeah, yeah, November 2015. When he says,
you know, "Terrible war, tragic." And
then he says right after that,
>> And we should have kept the oil, believe
me.
We should have kept the oil.
>> And we didn't take the oil. That's what
we should have done. We should have
taken the oil. And then, in fact, the
previous debate, he had actually said,
>> I'm a very militaristic person.
>> It's about judgment. I didn't want to go
into Iraq, and I fought it because
>> But you have to know when to use the
military. So, there he was, explicitly
saying, "I'm not an anti-war president.
I'm a smart-war president is what I am."
>> You're saying this wasn't actually a
genuine, heartfelt rejection of foreign
intervention, of using military power
abroad. That we might have interpreted
it that way, but that wasn't necessarily
what we were actually seeing.
>> Sure, once Trump realized this was a
winning message, then he began to say
things that I think were very much
against his core belief. He began to
say, "I'm the peace president. I'll
never start wars or anything like that."
But in fact, his core principle was, "I
believe in myself, and I believe in
leverage, and I believe in the assertion
of power. And in fact, I'm even a
militaristic person, but you have to
know when to use the military. You have
to know how to use strength. You have to
know, in essence, how to win." And if
there's any ideology to Trump beyond
self-belief, it's winning.
Now,
this sounds like is a kind of conflict,
two points that are in diametric
opposition to each other, that Trump is
on the one hand someone saying no
endless wars,
but on the other hand saying I'm a
militaristic person,
but whatever conflict those two notions
may have presented did not yet reveal
themselves in his first term and only
came to the surface recently.
>> We'll be right back.
So, let's talk about this moment that
we're in right now when the conflict
between these different worldviews on
the question of foreign wars is now
breaking out into the open. When did we
first start to see this, as you said,
really come to the surface?
>> Well, we saw a glimmer of Trump the
interventionist at the end of his first
term in January 2020 when he ordered
drone strikes to kill the head of Iran's
Quds Force, Qassem Soleimani. And for
that matter, we also saw him acquiesce
to the generals and keep troops in
Afghanistan, but Trump the
interventionist really came on full
display this term beginning with June of
last year when he ordered the bombing of
Iranian nuclear sites.
>> Yep.
>> And then there were people like Tucker
Carlson, Charlie Kirk, Steve Bannon,
each of whom went into the Oval Office
to implore Trump not to do this, afraid
that this could lead to a protracted
military conflict in the Middle East.
But then, once the bombing occurred,
there was an about-face by
the doubters on the right, Charlie the
and the others, saying in effect, what
were we thinking? This happened quickly,
this happened successfully, nothing bad
happened along the way, and we should
have known, in Trump we trust.
>> So, they back off then, but then of
course these foreign interventions
continue. Walk me through what they made
of the US intervening in Venezuela
earlier this year.
>> Yeah. Well, with Venezuela, it happened
so quickly. While some people had
experienced queasiness about it,
basically the Maduro expedition kind of
fell under the category of F around and
find out.
>> Mhm.
>> That here was a guy who had been hostile
towards the United States and paid the
price for it. And once again, without us
seeming to suffer any sorts of negative
consequences. If anything, it appeared
that the new regime in Venezuela was
going to be getting the message that,
you know, we're very, very interested in
those oil reserves you have. And if you
play ball with us, if you're on our
side, you'll be rewarded. If you're not,
well, you see what happened to the last
guy. And so, it looked like there was
really nothing to argue about.
>> Right. And in this case, he did the
thing that he said in the past he wanted
to do in Iraq, take the oil. I mean,
here he's making good on some version of
that promise.
>> That's right. And what he's doing,
Natalie, also is a reflection of what he
had been doing at home, right? I mean,
so from the beginning of his second
term, he was bringing his might down on
universities, on media conglomerates, on
large American law firms that he
believed were adversarial to him. He was
putting the muscle to them and forcing
them to make concessions. That in
essence was what he was doing to
Venezuela. He has as leverage the
greatest military and economic force in
world history, and he is deploying that
to gain concessions both abroad and at
home. This to Trump is the way a smart,
powerful person exercises their
leverage.
>> Okay, so basically the Iran bunker
bombs, the Venezuela action, those
really prove Trump's theory. Basically,
strength equals power. You can achieve
goals essentially by using that on the
global stage and not necessarily
suffering big political consequences for
doing so.
And then we get to the current conflict
in Iran.
>> Yes. And what happens then is that Trump
is in essence applying what he did in
Venezuela and what he'd done the
previous June in Iran
to a far more audacious notion, which is
to attempt to decapitate the regime of a
very powerful nation in the Middle East
that had been adversarial to America for
a very long time. To do this and once
again to suffer no negative
consequences. It's a real, real
high-wire act. So, to apply all of that
to not just a series of structures in
Iran, but to human leadership, to this
theocracy there, is a very, very
different game altogether.
>> Right. And we are now entering the
fourth week of this war and learning
just how difficult this is turning out
to be for Trump. He can't just do what
he did to universities to the government
of Iran.
>> He's learning that Iran is not Columbia
University, is not Paul Weiss law firm.
That it is a big nation that is
smack-dab in the middle of an extremely
complicated region. And it is a hornet's
nest that we have understood never to
kick. And Trump in doing what he did,
it's as if he forgot the history lesson
that citizen Trump, candidate Trump, was
giving on the debate stage 11 years
earlier.
>> And so, what's the reaction to that? You
know, how do people see this
increasingly complex war and Trump's
efforts to justify it?
>> Well, it depends on who you're talking
about. There has been this clear
fracture in the right-wing media
ecosystem.
>> This is a country that is a menace in
the civilized world and ending that is a
very worthy goal, which I think is what
the president is shooting for, whether
it means a very weakened
>> where you will see warhawks, Zionists,
and Trump loyalists continue to support
everything that Trump is doing.
>> I'm going to support the president. And
look, I'm not against bombing Iran. I
personally
>> Laura Loomer
>> But we need to comprehend what we're
dealing with. That regime needs to be
eliminated.
>> Mark Levin
>> So, how do we respond to this?
>> You, however, also see people who have
been fans of Trump, close to Trump, say
in essence, this is a big mistake.
>> Everybody knows the only reason we're
having this war is because Israel wants
it. This is their last chance, they
believe.
>> Such as Tucker Carlson
>> Committing young American men to go die
in Iran is not in our interest at all.
>> Which just seems so insane based on what
he ran on.
>> And Joe Rogan
>> I mean, this is why a lot of people feel
betrayed, right? He ran on no more wars.
>> Saying this is not at all what I voted
for.
>> The whole situation internationally has
been so tense already. And to add this
to the pile, it genuinely feels like
there's a real possibility that we might
be entering World War III.
>> And in expressing their opposition to
the war, have found themselves in a kind
of uncomfortable alignment with people
they really didn't want to align
themselves with.
>> Donald Trump is treacherous. He has
engaged in treachery with his Zionist
cabal. We are
>> People like the conspiracy theorist
Candace Owens
>> What does this administration do other
than cover up the Epstein files,
embezzle money through government
contracts, and bring us to war for
Israel? This administration
>> and the white nationalist Nick Fuentes.
>> Do not vote in the midterms, and if you
do, vote for Democrats. Shut it down. In
2026, shut it down.
>> You mentioned Zionists on one side of
this debate, kind of supporting Trump,
supporting the war. And on the other, a
group of influencers who have often been
very much against Israel and its
influence in this administration. So,
just explain that. How does Israel fit
into the debate that you're seeing right
now on the right?
>> To every question, seemingly, Israel has
been the answer when those questions are
posed to Tucker Carlson and to Candace
Owens. They see Israel really behind
every imagined conflict or conspiracy.
Some of it has been a biting
anti-Semitic sentiment, and some of it
also has been, I think, a new-found view
that why are we engaged in a conflict in
the Middle East where we can see the
Israeli government and Bibi Netanyahu in
particular are only too pleased to have
us there. Why do they have so much
influence?
>> Yeah, I mean, it's clear that there is
anti-Semitism baked into a lot of this
criticism. The undertones are clear, but
it does seem, in this case, as the Times
has reported, that Benjamin Netanyahu,
the prime minister of Israel, was very
much a driver of this joint war in Iran.
So, if you're someone who's already
predisposed to believing that Israel
leads the United States into bad arenas,
this feeds directly into that.
>> That's right. And I do think that people
who'd never asked these questions before
relating to Israel are starting to
accept the framing of a Candace Owens or
a Tucker Carlson that, well, this has
been going on for a long time, which has
from certain angles and at particular
times metastasized into outright
anti-Semitism in certain corners. But,
there's no question that the role of
Israel, and for that matter, support for
Israel in America is in a very different
place than it was just a few years ago.
>> And then, just recently, we saw the head
of counterterrorism for the
administration resigning over the war in
Iran. This is not just some podcast
host, not to denigrate podcast hosts,
but this guy presumably has access to
very real information, right?
>> Yeah, this guy is Joe Kent, who was the
director of the National
Counterterrorism Center. This guy was a
far-right close ally of of Donald Trump,
a 2020 election denier. So, very much a
part of the MAGA community, no one's
idea of a rhino. And here he was
submitting his resignation and walking
out and making public exactly why he did
resign, saying that in his belief Iran
did not constitute an imminent threat.
>> But, at this point, Robert, what's your
assessment of how much of a political
issue this is becoming for Trump and for
the Republican party? Because, yes, the
chattering classes seem to be very up in
arms about this, but
what about, you know, regular people,
voters? What do they actually think?
What do we know?
>> Yeah, well, one reflection of it is that
Republican elected officials, with
exception of two Kentuckians, Thomas
Massie and Rand Paul, have been
full-throated in their support for
Trump. They wouldn't be doing that if
they believed that there's going to be
hell to pay back home. And when we look
at opinion surveys, they seem by and
large to reflect the MAGA coalition
being behind Trump and thus behind his
war. I've seen another one, however,
Natalie from the Democracy Institute,
which is a conservative group, and that
poll very clearly shows that Trump is
losing young voters, he's losing black
and Latino voters, and his support
amongst independents has utterly
collapsed, all due to Iran.
>> That's interesting because those are the
voters he won over. Those are the voters
who were so key to getting him elected
in 2024.
>> That's right. He's completely underwater
when it comes to the independents, and
he's losing the people who enabled his
victory in 2024. So, what happens to
those voters? Do they stay home? Do they
support Democrats? The question is, will
voters trust Democrats, voters who have
stayed away from Democrats, and will the
Democratic brand that has really, really
eroded over the last decade somehow
manage to be burnished in a way that is
sellable to voters? Will Democrats just
content themselves with saying, "Look at
Trump and his stupid war. Look at Trump
and the cost of gas spiraling. Look at
Trump and his intransigence on the
Epstein files." When they've yet to come
up with their own sort of
forward-thinking, positive message that
persuades people that maybe Democrats
aren't so bad after all. I've yet to see
any winning message in that regard
coalesce. It's just been Trump bad,
which may be enough for the 2026
midterms, but it remains to be seen
whether or not that's going to be a
sellable message 2 years later.
>> What about the Republicans? Because
obviously Trump is not going to be
around forever. What do we think the
Republican party will learn from this
particular moment of division? Because
you can imagine a world in which this
war spirals out of control, lasts much
longer, and the party concludes, "Look,
we actually do need to lean into
isolationism, to the original core
principle of no foreign wars. But if the
conflict ends relatively soon with not a
lot of American casualties, not a ton
more money spent, you could see the
party deciding maybe you can walk this
tightrope that Trump is trying to walk.
>> Sure, that's right. I mean, it's really
difficult to tell how it's going to play
out. And you can see that sort of
hesitancy even in the administration
where Marco Rubio, the Secretary of
State, who has been alongside Trump the
public face of this war, and you could
see Rubio, I mean, on the one hand, you
know, him coming out and saying, "Look,
we did this cuz we said we could see
Israel was going to do it if we didn't."
And then having to walk it back in
essence and say, "No, no, no. I mean,
that's I
that's not what I was trying to say at
all." That he recognizes that, you know,
this war is going to be a difficult
thing to explain to voters. And a
difficult thing to describe as a
success.
>> Mhm.
>> While in the meantime, kind of receding
from view is the Vice President, the
seeming heir apparent to Trump, J.D.
Vance, who clearly is not the
cheerleader in the way that Rubio is.
>> Yeah, and we've also seen reporting
suggesting that Vance pushed back
against this Iran plan, but apparently
not that much because the Times reported
that he also said, "Well, if you're
going to do it, go big."
>> Yeah, and so is he preserving a kind of
position of independence in doing that,
and biding his time basically, allowing
himself
either to pivot into like totally
supporting a war just as descending, or
being the guy who was exercising notes
of concern and caution as the war
protracts itself.
>> And for these two figures that you are
singling out, Vance, the Vice President,
the representative of this isolationist
wing, and Rubio, who represents the more
old school neo-conservative side of this
party, the difficulty is that the
conflict is playing out in real time,
and in many ways their futures, their
political futures, and the futures of
the party kind of hinge on it.
>> That's right. Both Vance and Rubio are
trying to preserve their options. They
in essence have their feet on both sides
of the line, and in doing that, I mean,
what they're really doing nationally is
personifying
this moment of truth that has arrived
for the Republican Party. It's kind of
been sitting there for a while,
actually, about, you know, just what
they stand for. There was a bumper
sticker, America first, which could be
taken literally as stay out of other
countries. Just do stuff at home. And
now it's a question of just what is
America's role in the world, and nobody
really wants to have that conversation.
It's a complicated one. It's a difficult
one to sell to voters, but now it feels
like the Republican Party almost has no
choice but to confront it.
As they try to explain to their voters,
to Americans, what's this war about? Why
are we doing this? How is it of value to
Americans considering so many challenges
that we have domestically? It's feels
like a moment where an explanation of
what our role in the world is, and when
we should insert ourselves into
complicated regions like the Middle
East, it's a dialogue begging to be had
that has been avoided for years, which
now it feels like can't be avoided much
longer.
>> Well, Robert, thank you so much.
>> My pleasure.
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
Over the weekend, President Trump said
that if the Strait of Hormuz, the vital
oil shipping route that Iran is
blocking, wasn't fully opened by Monday
night, the US would, quote, obliterate
Iranian power plants.
Iran said it would retaliate against
such strikes by targeting infrastructure
used by Israel, the US, and American
allies, including water desalination
plants that are a lifeline for the
entire region.
In another sign of how desperate the
Trump administration is to get control
of the global energy crisis spurred by
the war, the US temporarily lifted
sanctions on some Iranian oil on Friday,
though it's unclear how much that move
will affect global oil prices.
And Robert Mueller, the former head of
the FBI who became a political target of
President Trump, died on Friday at the
age of 81.
On learning of Mueller's death, Trump
said in a social media post, "Good. I'm
glad he's dead. He can no longer hurt
innocent people."
As special counsel investigating
Russia's attack on the 2016 presidential
election, Mueller concluded that Russia
had carried out a systematic effort to
interfere in that election, and that the
Trump campaign expected it would benefit
electorally from that interference. But
the investigation didn't find evidence
that the Trump campaign had conspired
with Russia. And ultimately, Mueller
concluded that he could neither absolve
nor accuse President Trump of any crime.
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nevaetsky, Muj Saidy, Mary Wilson, and
Jessica Chung. It was edited by Paige
Cowart and Rob Zipko, and contains music
by Rowan Nemirow. Our theme music is by
Wonderly. This episode was engineered by
Chris Wood.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.